DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMScanned with CamScanneruniquely identifies the types of the relation. This is calledthe primary key of the relation .In the given tables : SH, PH and (SH, PH) are primary keysof the tables supplier , parts and Sp srespectively .Advantages :1 ) User friendly representation .Given a query :. find st for suppliers who supply PtF = ' PI .... find pt for parts supplied by ' S+ = ' SI " .Both the queries incorporate similar Search types andare symmetouc . In the relational model, symmetsuc querysolving is symmetouc and poses no problem .ii ) Storage operations ( insertion , deletion, updation) aresimple to make .. Hierarchial Model:PantsPl Nut Red 12 KolkataP2 - - -P 3 .Supplier31 B. Raghuram Mumbai 30081 .....200SI . . . 400S2 D.K. Sharma Kolleata 200> aty incorporated forrelations hip maintenance .( we might have placed supplier at the root instead of "parts") Entities are grepresented as free structures . The structureimplies the relationship .: ) In this particular relation, "part " is superior to "supplier"For each part, there may be more than one supplier recordoccurrences. Each Supplies srecord also contains the shipmentScanned with CamScannerquantity . the association is represented by the parent - childrelationship , hence the name.iii ) In general, the roof may have any number of depend-ance . Each of these may again have any number of depend -ances and so on .IN > Asymmetric staucture - not convenient for userAdvantages and disadvantages:1 ) Symmetric query solving is not symmetric .1) the hierarchial model possesses certain undesirableproperties with respect to storage operations .Insert: to introduce a new supplier, dummy partsare to be introduced unless the supplier supplies some part .Delete: deleting a shipment information is to deletethe supplier record , implying that we may lose all informationabout the supplier, if it happens to be the only shipment forthe supplier .Update : problems due to gredundant occurrences. Any!Change , in say city of a supplier , siequires searching through"the entire database for all such supplier srecords ..1) the advantage is the naturalness, as natural processesare inherently hierarchial .. Network Model :An extension of the hierarchial model.SI B. Raghuram MumbaiSQ D.K. Sharma KolkataK3002001400300Pl ....P2 - --P3 ...Scanned with CamScannerRemark : Data is represented as records and links. Entity oct-urs as records and associations as links. More general thanhierarchial structure Connector chain represents shipmentquantities . No concepts of superiors and dependance . Eachconnector occurrence links only one supplies and only onepart .Advantages and disadvantages:1 ) Symmetoruc query solving is symmetsuc .11 ) Storage operations are simple .111 ) Disadvantage is the complexity of links.Relational database deign :Relational.. the output of a data -Real DesignHierarchialbase design is the uverwoldNetworkview .SIt is the responsibility of the DBA to design the database,S assigning the related data items of the database to columns3 of tables ( with respect to a relational model ) , in a mannerthat preserves deurable properties .The database designer has to consider many issues at thesame time. The final output of the logical database designprocess is the wer's schema, since the user's schema rep -regents the database designer's solution. The user's schemataare usually difficult to understand and change. The designeris constrauhed by the limited data- structure types supportedby the database system ( since the designer has to keep inemind the access paths. The search strategies are dependant onScanned with CamScannerthe conceptual schema . )The designer may have to consider the access paths ofthe record , i.e ., how to access a particular record type . Thedesigner may have to consider how to make the smetsieral andupdating more efficient.There are two common technologies Entity - Relationship appro-ach and Normalization approach towards database design.However , it turns out that the relational design boued on eitherapproach transform into relational form having nearly identi -cal sresults , and in fact , the two approaches reinforce eachother .E-R approach :The key idea to the E-R approach is to concentrate on the con-Ceptual schema . At this stage , the designer should view the datafrom the point of view of the whole enterprise . "This descriptionis called entepouse conceptual schema or enterprise sche-ma. This Should be a pure representation of the real world andindependent of storage and efficiency considerations . the de -Sign process can be viewed as a 2 - phase process -. Design enterprise schema ... Translate enterprise schema to user schema for the data -boue system ..Advantages of the 2-phase approach ,1 ) the database design process becomes simpler and betterorganized ." ) The enterprise schema is easier to design than the final schema ,Since, it neednot be srestoucted by the capabilities of the dataScanned with CamScannerbase system , and is independent of storage and efficientconsiderations .i) Enterprise schema is more stable than the user's schema.If one wants to change from one database system to another,one would probably have to change the wer's schema, but notthe enterprise schemain The enterpsuse schema represented by the E-R diagram ismore easily understood by non - EDP ( electronic data process -ing ) people .E -R concepts :The E-R approach defines a number of data classification ob-jects . Three fundamental data classification objects are :. entities. relationships.. attributesEntity : - An entity is a collection of distinguishable realworld objects , having common properties , and is of interestto the enterprise. Is represented as rectangular boxes in anS E-R diagram .EMPLOYEEPROJECTDEPARTMENTAn entity is usually mapped to an actual table, and each row ofthe table corresponds to one of the distinguishable objects thatmake up the entity , called an entity occurence / entity instance.Remark: There are many things in the real world , and onlyCsome of them are of interest to the enterprise . It s the resp-oncibility of the database designer to select the entities, whichare important.Scanned with CamScannerRemark: Choice of entities is a lkey step to database design.Relationship ! - Given an ordered set of entities 5 ,, E ...... Em.( may not be distinct ) a relationship R defines a smile of corres -pondence between the instances of these entities. Specifically,R orepresents a set of im tuples " (ene2 .... " em)lei e Ei, I siem ??which is basically a subset of the cartesian product of theentities : EIX E2x ... * Em ( rather the entity - instances ) . A parti -cular occurence of a srelationship , corresponding to a tuple ofentity instances ( elle2) .. " em), where eil Ei and Isism , iscalled a grelationship instance / srelationship occurrence. m isthe degree of the srelationship . Is srepresented as diamond -shaped bosces in an E-R diagram.EMPLOYEEWORKS -PROJECTSONBELONGS =Binary srelationship -ASSIGNEDTOTODEPARTMENTSTypes of relationships :a ) one- to- one: For each entity instance in either entity , there isatmost one associated member of the other enfity.E.g. HEAD- OF ( employee, depoortment )EFRminimum _ cardinality ( B, R ) = 0maximum- cardinality (E,R) = 1minimum-Cardinalily (F, R) = 0maximum-cardinality (FR)- 1Scanned with CamScannerb) many - to -one: A relationship is many- to - one, from entityE to entity F , if one entity instance in F is associated to 0 ormore entity instances in E, but each instance in E is associa-ted with atmost one entity instance in F.8.9: BELONGS- TO ( employee, department)ERminimum - cardinality ( E, R ) = 1maximum-cardinality (E, R) = 1minimum- cardinality (F, R) = 0mascimum- cardinality ( FR) =n .c) many - to - many : A relationship is many- to- many from entity Eto entity F , it one entity occurrence in F is associated with anynumber of entity occurrences of E, and each entity occurrence inE is associated with any number of entity occurrences of F.8.9: WORKS- ON ( employee, project )FRminimum - cardinality ( E, R) = 0maximum-cardinality (E, R) = nminimum- cardinality (FR ) = 0mascimeim - cardinality ( FR ) = n . 4.Remark: There may be many types of relationships betweenentities , and some of them may not be of interest to the enterp-suse . The database designer is responsible for the selectionof srelationships srelevant to the enterprise .Remarle: Choice of srelationships is a key step to databasedesign .Attributes : - An attribute is a data item that describes aScanned with CamScannerproperly of an entity or a srelationship. Je represented a.oval-shaped boxes in an FR diagsiam .elte_namedesig)PHP_nameP_ locWORKS-BalEMPLOYEEPROJECTSON( dur,addCh#BELONGSASSIGNEDTOTODEPARTMENTSd -name( A bare outline of the ER diagram of the database )Types of attributes :a ) Simple single - valued attoributes : simple single . valued att -gributes are called simple attributes &9: e-name , duration.b) Composite attributes: Composite attributes can be divided intosubpants, 8g: address : street+ state + pin code. Compositeattributes help us to group together related altoributes, makingthe modeling cleaner .C) Multivalued attributes: multivalued altoributes are thosethat can take on multiple values for a single entity instance.E .g: phone # , hobby .keysa ) Superkey : A superkey is a set of one or more attributes , that swhen taken collectively allows us to identify uniquely an entityinstance in an entity . Say if elt were absent in the above data - Abase, then ( e- name, address ) could be treated as a superkey .Scanned with CamScannerAgain ( e-name, designation, address ) is also a superkey . Thusclearly , there may exist many superkeys ; any superser of aSuperkey is also a superkey in an entity.b) minimal super-key or candidate key: A superkey forwhich no proper subset is a superkey is said to be a candidate key. It is possible that several distinct set of attributesCould serve as a candidate key. 89: Ot, ( e-name , add . )CompositeC) primary key: The polimary key is a candidate key that ischosen by the database designer as the poincipal means ofidentifying entity occurrences , within an entity . Usually , apsrimgay key is wed in references from other tables .Eq: et, pt, It in employee , project and departmentrespectively . ( Not considering phone+ as an attribute. )Transformation Rules:1) each entity in an E-R diagram is mapped to a single tablein a relational database . The table is named after the enfity .J Columns of the tables represent all the single-valued simple5 attoributes that are attached to the entity. A porimany key isselected for the entity. Enfily occurrences are mapped to therows of the table .11) Given an entity E, with porimary key attribute p ; a multi-valued attribute a attached to E in an E-R diagram , istable of its own .mapped to a table of its own. The table is named after theplural multivalued attoribute ( E.g. PHONES ). The columns ofthe new table are named after p ( et ) and a (phone #) ,and the rows of the table correspond to (p, a ) value pairs -representing all pairings of attribute values of a, associa -ted with entity occurrences quelative to p in E. the primaryScanned with CamScannerkey attribute for this table is the set of columns in pand a.iii, when two entities Eand F, take part in a many-to - one,binary srelation R, and the entity F represents the many side,of the bielationship, the relational table T, transformed fromentity Fshould include columns constituting the primary keysfrom the table transformed from E. This is known as a foreignKey in TRemark . This foreign key cannot take on null values .N ) When two entities E and F take part in a many-to - manybinary orelationship R, the relationship is mapped to a siep - snesentative table T, in the sielated orelational database de -sign. The table contains columns for all attributes in the pré-many keys of both tables transformed from entities E and F,and this set of columns forme the porimany key for T. It alsocontains columns for all attributes attached to the onelation --ship(Here, primary keys of either tables in the relationship arenot attached to the transformed tables of the opposite entite -es , at this leads to data redundancy .The phenomenon of treating a sielationship like an entity ,as described above , is termed aggregation .Refinement allows answering queries pertaining to crossentity references in a orelational database. Refinement bizingsforth the tome essence of sielationships in a snelational datas[base design . )Refined E-R diagram, as compared to the bone outlineof the E -R diagram :Scanned with CamScannerDatabase :A database is a collection of stored operational data usedby the application systems of some particular enterprise( R. CO. Engles )Database components: The components of a database are :database : A Large collection of data, stored in secondanJstorage .application programs: Run against this data, operating onin all usual ways .on- line wers: Interacting through terminals, performing alfunctions ( mainly retorieral )directapplication programswers( less interactive)( greaterinteraction ).database / data storage .(overlapped units : portions of databasevieeved by Single vers / groups - bouedon srequirement / access sights etc. ). Interaction with a database , primarily includes -retrieval, insertion, deletion, updation ( via direct usersapplication programs )The database is integrated, so that the database containsdata for many wers , and not just one. This implies :Scanned with CamScanner@#e-namedesighrs _workP#P-nameadd.Sal .P_ locEMPLOYEE KEWORKS -PROJECTSONphone #durPHBELONGS -ASSIGNED =TO( many - to( many - to .TOforeignmany )aggregationonekey( many - to .one )has a separateDEPARTMENTS Ktable mapped toit with albributesd# )d-nameelt and phone ##.Definitions:a ) weak entity : A weak entity is an entity whose occurrencesare dependant for their existence through a relationship R onthe occurrence of another entity called strong entity . There maybe occasional cases in which the entity occurrence of an entityare not distinguished by their attributes but srather by theirorelationships to entities of another type. These entities arecalled weak entities . whereas, the entities whose entityoccurrences can be distinguished by its keys are called strongentities. 8g:PERSONNEL(strong entity )ISA( weak entity )PILOTScanned with CamScanner1 ) Any one user will be concerned with just a small portion ofitii ) Different user's portion, will overlap in various ways, i.e .,individual pieces of data may be shared by differentvers .Online users :end-users : Most intero ctive.. casual users : users accessing the database withSome commercial query language.. naive users: users accessing the database throughmenues .application programmers : Write the menu applicationsused by naive users. The program must foresee the needs ofthe users , and be able to pose quesues during execution , toretrieve desired information from the database .database administrator (ABA) : The DBA is a team of com -puter professionals responsible for the design and maintenant !ce of the database .An enterprise is a reasonably large organization - a manu -facturing company , university , hospital , government organi -gation that maintain data that can form a database .Operational data: It does not include any purely transientdata ( Il0, work queue etc. ) . Transactions may cause a !!change to the operational data , but are not a part of thedatabase . ( Transactions in hotel management systems ,airline reservation systems etc. - may be required to be storedScanned with CamScanneras operational data , as customers may request a detailedtransaction listing . ) Associations or relationships betweendata , must also be stored as part of operational data . 8.9 :For a manufacturing company - details of projects handled,use of parts - supplied by suppliers - warehouse locations- employees : each being a distinguishable entity , hasrelationships / associations with one another.Centralized database :S1) centralized control of operational data.11 ) the ABA has the central responsibility of the operati -onal data ( taking care of critical section issues ).Tasks of a ABA :1 ) Deriding information content .11) Designing the database .- organize views , restrictions etc .iii ) Recovery mechanism ( frequency of backup issues ) andbackups .IN ) Authorization checks ..v ) Monitor and upgrade performance issues.Advantages / implications of a DBMS :1 ) the amount of redundancy in the stored data can be red .uced . Independent applications may have their own pouratefiles leading to redundancy and wastage of storage space .with centralized control, this sredundancy can be reduced.11) Inconsistency : the problem of inconsistency can also beScanned with CamScanneravoided to some extent . this property directly follows fromredundancy removal , implying, two enteries of the same infor-mation may lead to inconsistency ifone is updated .Remark: Sometimes, there are technical reasons for main-taining several distinct copies of the same data . Any such ready -?ndancy should be carefully controlled.111) Data shasting: Data can be shared, i.e ., not only the exis -ting applications can share the data in the database , but also ,new applications can be developed to operate against thesame shared data .v) Standards: Industry standards con be enforced andmaintained by the DBA. This simplifies problems of maintenan-ce and data interchange between installations .N > Security: Security siestoructions can be applied, the DBAcan ensure that the only means of access to the database isthrough proper channels and hence can define authosuzationchecks to be carried out , when access to sensitive data isattempted . this also implies pouracy across various user dep - "artments .vi) Integrity : Integrity can be maintained . The data valuesstored in the database , must satisfy certain types of conust -ency constraints . The problem of integrity is the problem ofensusring that the data in the database is accurate.vii) Ease of application development: Cost and time for developingnew applications are reduced . Studies show that , a programmercan develop an application 2-4 times faster. The reason beingthat the programmer is free from designing , building, and main- Ataining master filesScanned with CamScannerwill) Data independence: Separation of data from the apper -cation program environment Organization of data can changeand evolve , without any change in the application program ..9: field-size Change, file- organization change etc. It is amayon objective of database systems and may be defe -ned as the immunity of applications to change in the storagestructure and access strategy, i.e ., the applications conce-ned donot depend on any particular storage stouwcture oraccess strategy. May be viewed as a 2-stage independence. logical data independence: capacity to change theconceptual schema , without having to change externalschemas or application programs .. physical data independence : capacity to Change theinternal schema, without having to change the conceptualschema .Schema of a database , stands for the description of a data -base .Database architecture: 3 . schema conchitecture (ANSI/SPARC conchitecture ) :(externalExt. view ,Set. viewsget viewn level )external -conceptual mappingconceptual(an abstraction : pertains todata as viewed by the NBAschema/ levelconceptual - internaland not the actual storage )mapping : given byunderlined DBMSinternal( focuses on the actual storagestructure.Schema / levelof data, notviewed by the DBAData as in the secondary sto -rage )Scanned with CamScannerInternal level . This level has an internal schema, which definessthe physical storage structure of the DBMS , ie, how the data -base is actually stored ( depends on the data model of theDBMS). It desoubes the complete details of data storage andaccess paths for the database.Conceptual level: This level is defined by a conceptualschema through the Data Definition Language ( DAL ) of theDBMS package used. This is done by the DBA, Who decideswhat information is to be kept in the database . This is a repre- &sentation of the entire information content in the database, in aform that is somewhat abstract , in comparison to the way inwhich the data is actually ( physically ) stored .( Eg: physically a B-tree, but conceptually a table ) It maybe completely different from the way data is viewed by theuser . It describes what data are actually stored in the data -base , and the relationships that exist among the data .External level: This level is defined by a number of ext - oremal schemas or views. Most database users will not be con-cerned with the entire database, but need just a part of it.Thus , there are many external views of it, which basicallyconsists of definitions of various external record types in thatview .Remark : The conceptual schema is intended to include addisttional features like authosugation checks and validation pro-acedures.The DOMS is a software that :Scanned with CamScanneri) Allows the DBA to define the conceptual and externalmodel through the DAL. In most cases, the physical modeldefinition is part of the package.") Allows users to manipulate data through Data Manipula-tion Language (DML) commands and routines.in) Handles all accesses to the database, i.e ., controts theoverall operation of the database .Data Definition Language: A high-level non-procedural las-quage . It is a notation for describing the entities and rela -fronships among the data entities , in terms of a particulardata model . It is used to :1) Express the design of the database .11) Modify the design .hi ) Describe in abstract terms what the physical lay outof the database should be .Specify domain constraints , referential integrity , assertions , authorizationsData Manipulation Language: Used to manipulate data, i.eperform storage ( insert , deletion , retsuere etc. ) operations .Remark: The DDL and the DML depend on the DBMS packagewhich in turn depends on the data model .Data Models: In a centralized database, there are & typesof data models which form the heart of a database :1 ) Relational 11 ) Hierararchial 1Hi Network,. Relational Model :Scanned with CamScannerSupplier: ( entity : provides completeinformation)S#S_nameCitySIB. Raghuram Mumbai82A. K. Sharma Kolkata. table synonymouswith relationParts: ( entity ). record synony-P#p _ namecolourcwf . City .mous with instanceDNutRed12 Kolkataor tuple ...P 2Bott-Green17MumbaiPsScrewBlue17DelhiSp : ( A table that symbolizes a relationS#PHstymore than an entity )P.300SP 2200The statement : Supplier no. 81 of name!S.Pg400B . Raghuram stays in Mumbai : depictsS2P300a relationship which is best explainedin the SUPPLIER table.1) Entities and associatiations are viewed as tables Corre-lationships )11) Most convenient form for the users .1 N) For every tuple, a relation exists between every attoributeof the table , and the same relation holds for every tuplewithin a relation . And thus the name relational model .Within a given relation , there is one attribute ( may be aComposite attribute of 2 or more attoributes ) with values thatScanned with CamScanner