Plagiarism is a 'theft of intellectual property' . These day a stupendous amount of data  is available over the Internet. With this large amount of data, the issue of plagiarism has increased. Application of NLP can help resolve this kind of problem. But today, with the huge data available, the problem of paraphrasing and obfuscation is also increasing. Hence, we have developed a semantic plagiarism detector where there will be semantic checking which includes checking of synonyms. The underlying syntactic structure and semantic meaning of two document can be compared to reveal their similarity. Keywords - plagiarism, paraphrasing, obfuscation, NLP, semantic meaning
Plagiarism is the act of stealing something that someone else writes and presenting it as our owns. There are various type of plagiarism such a copy-paste, paraphrasing text, idea plagiarism, etc. This approach is suitable for identifying copy paste plagiarism. But it fails when a word is replaced by synonyms. Every Sentence can be paraphrased, conveying same meaning. To find semantic is measure task to identify paraphrasing of words. This method helps to find semantic of sentence using part of speech of the sentences. This system help to identify copy-paste plagiarism and finding plagiarized sentence that are semantically same but differ in syntax.
Plagiarism is the representation of another person's language, thoughts, ideas, or expressions as one's own original work. Plagiarism is considered as a academic dishonesty and a break of journalistic ethics. It can lead to penalties, suspension, expulsion from school. Recently, cases of "extreme plagiarism" have been identified in academia.
The modern concept of plagiarism as immoral and originality as an ideal emerged in Europe in the 18th century, particularly with the Romantic movement.
Plagiarism may not be the same in all countries. Some countries like India and Poland consider plagiarism as a crime, and there are cases of people being imprisoned for plagiarizing.
In other instances plagiarism might be the complete opposite of "academic dishonesty," in fact some counties find the act of plagiarizing a professional's work flattering.
Students who moved to the United States from countries where plagiarism is not frowned upon often find the transition difficult.
According to Bela Gipp academic plagiarism is:The use of ideas, concepts, words without appropriately acknowledging the source.