Avul Pakir Jainulabdeen Abdul Kalam (/ˈæbdəl kəˈlɑːm/ (listen); 15 October 1931 – 27 July 2015) was an Indian aerospace scientist and politician who served as the 11th President of India from 2002 to 2007. He was born and raised in Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu and studied physics and aerospace engineering. He spent the next four decades as a scientist and science administrator, mainly at the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and was intimately involved in India's civilian space programme and military missile development efforts.[1] He thus came to be known as the Missile Man of India for his work on the development of ballistic missile and launch vehicle technology.[2][3][4] He also played a pivotal organisational, technical, and political role in India's Pokhran-II nuclear tests in 1998, the first since the original nuclear test by India in 1974.[5]
Kalam was elected as the 11th President of India in 2002 with the support of both the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party and the then-opposition Indian National Congress. Widely referred to as the "People's President",[6] he returned to his civilian life of education, writing and public service after a single term. He was a recipient of several prestigious awards, including the Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian honour.
While delivering a lecture at the Indian Institute of Management Shillong, Kalam collapsed and died from an apparent cardiac arrest on 27 July 2015, aged 83.[7] Thousands, including national-level dignitaries, attended the funeral ceremony held in his hometown of Rameswaram, where he was buried with full state honours.[8]
His Excellency Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, the Former President of India and a world-renowned Space Scientist, was keen on encouraging the students in India to take active interest in the emerging Technologies, including Space Tech, as these significantly impact our daily lives. For India to continue to make impressive strides and leadership role in Space Technology, the youth of India must get interested, and deeply involved in Space Technology, Cube Satellites, Micro-gravity Research, etc. This nationwide competition is to encourage and stimulate that enthusiasm in Space Technology and operational Cube Satellites among the youth of India, as envisioned by Dr. Abdul Kalam.
Promoters
'Abdul Kalam Vision India Movement', Chennai, TN, India (AKVIM)
'Aeolus Aero Tech Pvt. Ltd,' Bengaluru, India (AAT)
Retired Scientists, from ISRO and Space Tech Experts - India, collaborating with AAT
International 'We Serve' Foundation, Inc., Lexington, KY, USA (IWSF)
Objectives A Nationwide Quest To Select AK-EDUSAT TEAM
To encourage students in India pursue a career in Space Technology
To identify through a national contest, TEN (10) Student-teams in India (ii) to be guided and mentored by reputed Space Technology Experts (iii) to design, develop, validate an operational Cube Satellite 'AK-EDU-SAT-001'. Once completed and is proven to be fully operational, suitable for deployment, the Promoters shall recognize the teams appropriately for their historic participation. This contest shall provide an interactive, high-tempo, dynamic opportunity for students in high schools and colleges in India to participate in a nation-wide competition.
Former President of India Dr. Avul Pakir Jainulabdeen Abdul Kalam is one of the most distinguished scientist of India. Dr. Kalam became the 11th President of India on 25th July 2002. After five eventful years he demitted office on 25th July 2007. His focus is on transforming India into a developed nation by 2020. His accent is on constructive networking and excellent human resources for an economically developed, prosperous and peaceful society
Born on 15th October 1931 at Rameswaram in Tamil Nadu, Dr. Kalam, graduated in Science from St. Joseph's College, Trichy in 1954 and specialised in Aeronautical Engineering from Madras Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1957. Dr. Kalam is a pioneer in fibre glass technology and led a young team to initiate this effort in ISRO from design, development leading to production of composites rocket motor cases.
He was responsible for the evolution of ISRO's launch vehicle programme, particularly the PSLV configuration. After working for two decades in ISRO and mastering launch vehicle technologies, Dr. Kalam took up the responsibility of developing Indigenous Guided Missiles at Defence Research and Development Organisation as the Chief Executive of Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme (IGMDP). He was responsible for the development and operationalisationof AGNI and PRITHVI Missiles and for building indigenous capability in critical technologies through networking of multiple institutions. One of his significant contribution was creating Research Centre Imarat for advanced technologies.
Dr. Kalam is one of the most distinguished scientists of India with the unique honour of receiving honorary doctorates from 48 Universities and institutions from India and abroad. The Honorary Doctorates include, Nyenrode Business University, Netherlands; Nanyang Technological University, Singapore; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburg USA; University of Wolverhampton, UK; University of Kentucky,USA; Oakland University, Michigan USA; University of Waterloo, Canada; University Sans Malaysia, Malaysia University of Sydney, Australia and the Simon Fraser University, Vancouver.