To read and write image file we have to import the File class [ import java.io.File; ]. This class represents file and directory path names in general.
To handle errors we use the IOException class [ import java.io.IOException; ]
To hold the image we create the BufferedImage object for that we use BufferedImage class [ import java.awt.image.BufferedImage; ]. This object is used to store an image in RAM.
To perform the image read write operation we will import the ImageIO class [ import javax.imageio.ImageIO;]. This class has static methods to read and write an image.

In the next set we will be learning how to get and set the pixel value of images in JAVA.

This article is contributed by Pratik Agarwal. If you like GeeksforGeeks and would like to contribute, you can also write an article using contribute.geeksforgeeks.org or mail your article to contribute@geeksforgeeks.org. See your article appearing on the GeeksforGeeks main page and help other Geeks.

Please write comments if you find anything incorrect, or you want to share more information about the topic discussed above.

Attention reader! Don’t stop learning now. Get hold of all the important Java Foundation and Collections concepts with the Fundamentals of Java and Java Collections Course at a student-friendly price and become industry ready.







During the II world war in 1941, it was a difficult time for our family at Rameswaram. 
I was a ten year old boy then. War had almost reached our doors of Rameswaram since the cloud of war had 
already reached Colombo. Almost everything was a rarity from food articles to anything. Ours was a large 
joint family. The size of our family was five sons and five daughters and three of whom had families. 
I used to see in my house anytime three cradles. My grandmother and mother were almost managing this 
large contingent. The environment in the home alternated by happiness and sadness. I used to get up 
at four in the morning, take bath and went to my teacher Swamiyar for learning mathematics. He will 
not accept students if they had not taken bath. He was a unique mathematics teacher and he used to 
take only five students for free tuition in a year. My mother used to get up before me, and gave 
bath to me and prepared me to go for the tuition. I use to comeback at 5:30 when my father would be 
waiting for taking me to the Namaz and Koran Sharif learning in Arabic school. After that I used to 
go to Rameswaram Road Railway station, three kilometers away to collect newspaper. 
Madras Dhanushkodi Mail will pass through the station but will not stop, since it was war time.
 The newspaper bundle will be thrown from the running train to the platform.